If Resources Were Created with Terraform but Then Modified Manually in AWS

Let’s say you originally created the EC2 instance and security group using Terraform, but you manually modified them in the AWS console (e.g., added more rules to the SG or changed the EC2 instance type).

Steps to Sync Terraform with AWS:

Step 1: Run terraform refresh to Update Terraform’s State File
Terraform’s state file won’t automatically reflect changes made directly in AWS.

terraform refresh

This will update the state file with the latest changes from AWS.

Step 2: Run terraform plan to Detect Any Drift

After refreshing the state, run terraform plan to detect any differences between the AWS resources and the Terraform configuration. Terraform will show any changes that need to be applied.

terraform plan

For example, if you manually changed the SG rules or modified the EC2 instance, Terraform will identify the drift and show the necessary changes.

Step 3: Apply Changes to Sync Resources
If there’s a mismatch (e.g., EC2 instance type or security group rules have been manually modified), Terraform will show what changes it will make. You can then run:

terraform apply

Terraform will update the resources to match the desired configuration in your .tf files.

3. If Resources Were Modified in AWS and Terraform Modified Them Too
If both AWS and Terraform modify the resources, the key is ensuring the state file is always in sync with AWS. When Terraform applies changes, it updates the state file. If someone modifies resources directly in AWS, Terraform might overwrite those changes when it applies.

Note:
For latest version(v0.15+) version:-



The terraform refresh command is deprecated. Use the updated steps to sync Terraform with AWS after manual changes:
 1. Detect Drift
Run terraform plan to compare the current AWS state with your Terraform state and configuration.

terraform plan

 2. Apply Changes
If drift is detected, run terraform apply to sync resources with your .tf configuration.

terraform apply

Key Points:
 • terraform plan now replaces terraform refresh.
 • Avoid manual AWS changes; if made, update your .tf files accordingly.
 • Always review terraform plan before applying changes.
